a longtime viewer of the channel wrote
in
sent me an email saying he's been
reading
but his philosophy says how much
buddhist philosophy means to him
personally
asks about how much buddhist philosophy
meant to me
brought about personal transformations
for
i myself in a separate paragraph the
same email
he mentions that he's been saving up
money from his job
for i guess several years and he's
thinking about taking
a lengthy vacation in thailand
of one or two years
i take these things seriously and when
people tell me this sort of thing about
their life
i think very often i take what they're
telling me
much more seriously than they do
themselves
you're planning to spend a year or two
in thailand not egypt
why not egypt no seriously why not
if your life is 100 years long
two years really is much more
than two percent of it because there are
a whole lot of years in your life
where you have no control over where you
are
and what you're doing with your time
most of us the first 20 years of our
life
we didn't have that much control over
our parents head control our school
whatever their years of your life where
your job as control or you're raising
kids yourself
or you're in the army and you're
fighting in world war 4 whatever the
situation be
you don't know how many years you get to
make that decision for so if you're
going to take two years of your life
let's go to thailand that's a big
decision that i take i take very
seriously
i may take that much more seriously than
you do
yourself if it's not egypt
you may not think of it this way you may
be passing up
now the opportunity to go to egypt
live in egypt get to know you forever
you may never get the opportunity to
live in egypt again
and you you probably didn't even think
of it that way you probably didn't think
of what it was you were
sacrificing to make this time in
thailand possible but you're sacrificing
the whole world
now of course it's a little bit surreal
if what we're talking about is buddhist
philosophy is it
because buddhism doesn't come from
thailand
buddhist philosophy is not now and never
was written
in the thai language it's written in an
indian language
that only survives in sri lanka called
pali so we get in some very interesting
questions as to why it would be thailand
if this is about buddhism
but maybe it's not i'm not going to
presume this
about my reader who wrote in to tell me
this and
ask my opinion um
i think on some deep level
we appreciate that to have
contact with what's ancient and profound
and meaningful
in egypt would be hard work
i think all of us as
western english-speaking modern people
can also appreciate
maybe without even realizing what the
thoughts and assumptions of going to it
that to have contact with the political
and social reality of egypt today
of modern egypt to understand what's
happening in egypt now
what happened in the last 20 years to
make it this way and then to begin to
really think about
what's going to happen in the next 20
years we can appreciate that if that
to have that kind of meaningful
connection to egypt
would be hard work
why is it that people think they can
have a really meaningful connection
with ancient buddhism in thailand and
with the reality of what thailand is
today
modern thailand and that's going to be
easy
that it's going to be a vacation
it would be unbelievably hard work and
and i'm in a position to know
it would be a tremendous sacrifice that
would change you
for the rest your life maybe for the
better
and i think you can probably appreciate
that
if you just think through what if you
decided to take two years
to learn the egyptian dialect of arabic
and i don't even know what your interest
would be in egypt it could be modern
politics it could be
uh archaeology and egyptology or even
just the tourism industry there
connected ancient egypt i don't know but
if you think about how that would change
you two years in the desert
shall we say in egypt i think it's very
clear how high the stakes are
and somehow somehow and i think
youtube's been a huge part of it
people have lulled themselves into
thinking
thailand is easy right and that there's
nothing that you're gonna lose here
and and what is it let's think really
clearly what is it you think
that you're gonna gain see this this guy
in two separate paragraphs he just says
to me there's some kind of meaningful
connection to buddhism
and then there's an interest in him he's
saving up money and spending one year or
two years in thailand
if he doesn't make any specific claim
about this being uh
a spiritual journey or a search for a
more meaningful life or
self-transformation he doesn't say
anything like that
it may be it may be consciously that's
what he's looking for
it may be that he's not conscious of the
extent of which that's what he's hoping
for
right very few people will tell you
openly that they are seeking the kingdom
of god
on earth a lot of us are
right a lot of us sign up for
humanitarian work
in a third world country and we're
looking for something a lot more
meaningful
than just washing the feet of the poor
or seeing a starving man eat a loaf of
bread
there's not a whole lot of spiritual
depth to that there may be something
else philosophically spiritually
that he wants he may not have thought
that all the way through
either okay if you're talking to me
about two years in thailand
and it's it's somehow about
philosophy and it's about who you are
and who you're going to become
let me ask you why is it thailand and
not greece
why is it not athens and delphi
and what the hell we can throw in the
outer islands too but
whatever there are archaeological sites
and ancient literature connect all parts
of greece not just
not just uh athens and delphi why why
isn't it greece
now i'll tell you something okay i was
not raised
poor i was raised by insane left-wingers
i was raised by communists my parents
were
my parents idealized poverty and i got
to see my parents go
from being really poor to getting into
the middle class
and then kind of by the time it was too
late toward the end of my time at
university they had
they had money to spare they were their
financial fortune improved
uh during my teenage years let's say all
right
i thought about doing ancient greek
and latin when i was a young man
i felt intimidated i felt that was
something for people who were born
wealthier than i am
i thought that was for people who were
more talented or more brilliant than i
am that it was some kind of tremendous
challenge that only people with special
privileges could possibly
take on all right and i was wrong and
i'll regret that for the rest of my life
from my perspective today ancient greek
and modern greek
these are punk languages they're
incredibly easy languages incredibly
easy work to do
latin are you kidding me compared to
working on cambodian
thai the ocean pali burmese
the languages i've worked on currently
chinese in the past japanese also
worked on incredibly difficult languages
incredibly difficult
political history social history okay
all that stuff
from my perspective now as an old man is
easy but when i was young
i felt that intimidation i felt that
chill of institutional
elitism like somehow the philosophy of
greece
and athens and rome and italy and
whatever
the philosophy of ancient europe let's
put it that way ancient mediterranean
that somehow that was something
unapproachable so
some would take tremendous sacrifice
tremendous resources to approach all
right
maybe i was wrong and maybe there's a
reason to be intimidated there's a
reason to be afraid
because we all of us can sense that it
would be
hard work yes you can go on vacation
in greece and if all you do is go on
vacation in greece
what you will have access to are beaches
alcohol dance clubs
games football to those of you who are
in europe right the culture of modern
greece is visual of against you and of
course only in as much as you can
communicate in the greek language or in
broken english or
however you get by but you're going to
have an incredibly shallow
vacuous experience unless you make
some extraordinary effort again either
to connect
with the philosophy with the ancient
history with the modern history with
what happened the last 20 years of
greece
what's going to happen the next 20 years
what it is that really makes greece what
it is
in some meaningful and profound sense
and we all
feel that that would be
tremendously hard work and you know
funniest thing is
i don't know what it is about thailand
even when you contrast
what people think of when you say you're
going to take a year off to live in
thailand
what if you told them you're going to
take a year off to live in cambodia
what if it was a year off to live in
myanmar
also known as bra that sounds different
does that starts to sound
like hard work so why
why is it that you would think that in
thailand you could have an intellectual
vacation and and sort of get the the
benefits sort of get the rewards
that in some other place in some other
cultural location
like egypt or greece we can so easily
see in our minds that would take
extraordinary effort extraordinary
self-discipline
an extraordinary amount of work and you
know of course above all else which
you're what you're dealing with is the
language barrier
but sure you're also just struggling to
to overcome your own ignorance
all of these things are finite in terms
of the philosophy
of ancient greece the more you know
the less there is to know there are not
that many books
to read from ancient greece the pali
canon
the the true philosophy of ancient
buddhism it's finite i could walk you
through it if you pay me to teach you a
course
in one year i could probably teach you
everything you want to know about
buddhist philosophy
i got better things to do but you know
it's finite
the literature is finite the culture is
finite
the politics the philosophy it's finite
you can do it
you can learn it but to think of that
and
recognize that as work and to recognize
that even if you live a hundred years
how many years do you have where you're
able bodied and energetic
and able you know not just financially
but every other way
to either go to egypt or to go to
thailand and
why really are you talking to me about
going to thailand
for two years right i i don't presume to
know i take what you say to me seriously
do you send me this email i take this
really seriously and when i look back at
my own life
i mean nobody took it seriously when i
told him i was gonna i told people yeah
i'm gonna go to cambodia and do
humanitarian work and people just
rumbled up their faces and
snarled and laughed and this is the most
ridiculous thing what was meaningful to
me
okay i did not go to cambodia
to find the kingdom of heaven on earth i
did not go there as a christian
missionary and i didn't go there as a
buddhist missionary i went for a
combination of reasons that were really
meaningful to me you know when i was
there in canada
i can't tell the whole story in this
video i went to cambodia to do a
combination of humanitarian work
and research that meant a lot to me and
my own brothers
and sisters and parents all they could
do
was snarl and be snarky i think none of
those people would even admit today what
[ __ ] they were to me about it
they didn't get it and they didn't want
to know and you know what none of us are
on speaking terms today none of us are
none of us get along i mean
these things have long-term consequences
um for for everyone involved
all right so you know now again someone
else
might have presumed i wanted to go to
cambodia for
stereotypical hippie reasons for
stereotypical spiritual reasons or even
stereotypical buddhist reasons
and i'm not such a stereotypical guy so
i don't presume about you
the dude who sent me this email i don't
presume that i know your reasons
but i'm saying probably whatever your
reasons are they probably mean a hell of
a lot to you
the same way my reasons meant a hell of
a lot to me and if you've been telling
yourself
this is just something fun this is just
something cool it's just a vacation
i think you might be lying to yourself
not lying to me but lying to yourself
about
how much this means to you now sir i'm
just going to get the exact wording here
um he says
how did your study of buddhism benefit
you mentally
he says there are a few important
lessons he has adapted
sorry adopted from his from his his
understanding all right
um
what i got at a buddhism was nothing
was absolutely nothing
and there are very few people on earth
who knew me
before i was involved in buddhism to
contrast
to during and after all right i had
already cultivated a level of
philosophical sophistication
before i got involved with buddhism that
meant that the impact of buddhism in my
life or in terms of
so-called mental benefits would
basically be
nil all right the type of benefit
you can get from buddhism
let me be clear i don't just mean the
books
the type of benefit you can get by going
to thailand
learning the thai language
studying the ancient history that
connects india to thailand
that you know brings that philosophy so
imperfectly
across a history of more than 2 000
years and
studying the reality of the modern
political history as it's unfolded over
the last 500 years say and what the
what's unfolding today and what you can
gain by doing humanitarian work at the
same time
and seeing how rice has grown and seeing
how mango farms work and all those
wonderful things
the benefit you could possibly get from
buddhism
with this incredibly expansive
definition that includes the rice farms
and even let's say the analysis of
prostitution and drug addiction and all
things that are connected
to the culture of buddhism right
inelectably all right
the benefit you can get from that is
absolutely
no different from the benefit you could
get
from going to egypt and doing the same
thing it's no different from the benefit
you get
going to greece and doing the same thing
all right
what i learned from buddhist philosophy
were things i already knew
from ancient greek to some extent
ancient roman sources i could teach you
the same philosophy
from ancient greek and jerusalem and you
know ultimately
what's really worthwhile is learning to
articulate
your own philosophy on your own terms
for yourself and your encounter with
philosophy
really
[Laughter]
i have to studiously avoid using terms
that hippies
have spoke have so totally perverted the
meaning of that the audience will
misunderstand i can't talk about
self-knowledge i can't do that i can't
do that
so
look if you've been watching this
youtube channel for five years
you've never seen me wear a pair of
glasses
even once you have also never once
heard me attribute the improvement in my
vision
to the miraculous effects of a vegan
diet
the fact is right around the same time i
started eating vegan diet
i stopped wearing glasses
i could probably sell a diet book i
could probably come out here with a
bunch of wild speculation
about how the anti-inflammatory effects
of the vegan diet or
eliminating the last traces of dairy
from my diet somehow
connected to my sinus cavities and my
vision i could probably put together a
plausible case
that somehow there's a cause-and-effect
relationship
between a vegan diet and the fact that i
don't wear glass anymore right
i don't believe that myself
it's very easy for people to become
beholden to the particular philosophy
that comes into their life
that challenges them to develop the
vocabulary
to articulate their own philosophical
thoughts to ask themselves and ask
others
philosophical questions and to challenge
assumptions
that may be completely unexamined in
their lives that may have come into
their lives
right from their parents and
grandparents okay
nothing could be more pathetic than to
meet
an angry young man who feels
that the heavens opened up to him
because he discovered the philosophy of
anne rand
so-called objectivism all right
i digress to say very briefly it's
possible
that ann rand is the worst author
ever to be officially categorized as a
philosopher to be admitted into the
philosophy section
terrible writer terrible philosopher
nevertheless
it's philosophy and you don't have to
look for the internet
to meet young men who feel beholden
to this book for the positive effect oh
this book came into their eyes and for
the first time
they thought through the difference
between objective reality and subjective
reality
and you know what's real and what's
opinion and
what's their personal value and what
does it mean to be an individual in a
society
these questions right
and it doesn't occur to them to
challenge the authority
or the miraculous benefits they've
gotten from this particular author
but thinking through hey wait a minute
i could have developed myself in the
same way by going to egypt
i could have developed by going to
athens
actually actually the kind of benefit
i've had
the kind of transformation i've i've
been through here
i could have worked that out for myself
using other very different materials
right maybe this isn't something special
about the book
maybe there's something special about me
this is something special i've
accomplished
even if the particular book that was in
your life at that time provided you with
the vocabulary provided with the
occasion to you know engage in those
in those reflections all right
what are the reflections that you know
the buddhist
corpus of philosophical text provides
you with
a lot of reflections on desire the
relationship between desire
and happiness the extent to which
you know pursuing a desire and then
fulfilling a desire
and then maybe feeling exhausted
afterwards
might be worse than if you had just
really examined the nature of the desire
at the beginning of that process and had
overcome it
without indulging yourself
i can't call that deep man i can't
there's nothing deep about it nothing at
all
okay there's nothing deep
about ayn rand there isn't all right
but there are going to be some people
who become beholden
to this book this book it happened to be
the right book
the right that brought this vocabulary
into your life
that gave you the occasion to question
and challenge these ideas
to question and challenge your own
assumptions
most likely most likely to
question and challenge the assumptions
that were
inculcated into you by your parents by
your grandparents by your school teacher
possibly by the christian church if you
grew up in a christian family
possibly and i know with ann rand and
specific that's also
a lot of these right-wing guys had
christian parents and rand liberates
them
they become atheists they overthrow
christian
christian time i understand the
psychological significance of that in
their lives
all right um
all right equal this ligno
from any block of wood an idol
can be carved from any block of wood
human beings can create a god
something they idolize idealize
something they
cling to all right
imagine you're in a room
alone and you're cold
you pick up a heavy stone and you walk
back and forth
in the room and miraculously
this heats up your body your body heats
up
the air around you right
before you know it seems like there's
warmth
all around and yet the stone itself
remains cold
that's buddhist philosophy there's
nothing there
you're attributing meaning to something
when the meaning is in the work that you
do and you can do that work
in egypt you can do that work in greece
you can do that work anywhere at all